This time last year, creative director
Richard Holman floated me this project.
Seven-minute slot at Outernet London,
which is essentially a big digital
interactive space where brands and
media companies create these immersive
experiences for the general public
just off of Tottenham Court Road.
The main space being comprised of these
four huge 16K floor-to-ceiling screens,
plus a screen as the ceiling itself.
It's this 360-degree digital
immersive environment.
Brief was super open.
Essentially, they wanted something that
hadn't been done yet in that space,
something that fully utilized the space
and its tech capabilities, motion capture,
skeletal tracking, gesture recognition,
various smart triggers, spatial audio,
app integration, QR entry points, AR.
So I'd obviously spent some time
looking at what had already been done.
Everything I came across was really
visually impressive and stimulating.
More often than not, the sheer scale
of the content has that impact, either
purely for entertainment value or on
the other hand you had like informative
pieces, most being a mixture of both.
But what I was really keen to explore
was can the audience come away
with something more than, "Oh, that
was really entertaining. That was
great." Can they have the opportunity
to change the piece in some way?
Can they leave their own mark?
Can they change the experience
for the next person?
Maybe the experience itself can change
and adapt when the audience interact.
So I ended up submitting a proposal
with four different concepts.
Some of the concepts themselves function
more like frameworks that you can attach
to an outright narrative really to
elevate the content of those experiences.
So I was looking at things like, for
example, every experience lasts for
about seven minutes, so the media
company has about seven-minute duration
before the space loops onto the next
experience by a different company.
Could I extend the experience beyond
the seven minutes whilst honoring
that seven-minute restriction?
And if so, what would that look like?
Maybe it's a case of taking
what we're used to seeing in art
installation and adapting that idea
to suit this context and venue.
I proposed like a dynamic piece
that grows and evolves in real time
based on audience participation.
Each visitor, as they're interacting
with the space, leaves their own
creative contribution, so every
time our seven-minute experience
comes around, it's an evolution.
Whatever the audience does and
leaves behind gets stored and
carried over to the next cycle.
So the next crowd picks up where the
last left off and so on and so forth.
So the experience gets to change and
emerge over time, which gives this like
return value, so you wanna come back
to see how the piece has changed over
time and if your mark is still there.
So whereas every other piece is
like a static, once you've seen
it, you've done it, this particular
framework challenges that standard.
Something else that I picked up on
and wanted to explore was charities
like Greenpeace and, uh, National
Trust have done these great,
really great special effects.
They take the audience on a journey.
They tell a story really well,
really, really good, but they
all seem to end in the same way.
Each would end basically asking for
donations, much like a charity advert.
In my opinion, it reduced this
huge spectacle down to just a big
charity advert at the end of the day.
The audience interacting with
the experience itself, could that
interaction in real time turn into
something real in the real world?
A really basic example of this might be
imagine the experience is a, a rewilding
effort restoring natural forests.
The content of the experience itself
might be a digital tree, right?
So say, the audience have the opportunity
to interact with the ongoing narrative
by maybe planting a digital seed.
When they plant that seed, they see
all these digital effects to validate
that they've interacted with the space.
Now, there's nothing
particularly new about that.
Maybe the app that they have to
use to interact with the space
actually asks them to, pay to make
that digital interaction happen.
But I wanted to take it much further
than that and make it almost seamless.
I was actually inspired by this app
and browser extension called Gener8.
Users agree to the company collecting
some basic data, and then their model
sells that data to advertising companies,
and the app then gives a percentage
of that revenue back to the end user.
That kind of mechanism would lend
itself perfectly to these NGO
experiences that rely on donations.
Can we apply a similar concept
to the immersive experience?
Obviously, the QR code would function
as an invitation to interact with
the piece, but then it also doubles
as a consent-based data donation.
That's something that we're used to doing
every day, so it's almost frictionless.
It's like we accept the browser
cookies, we accept T's and C's.
So the very data from the
participant's time in the experience
itself is incredibly valuable.
That's data we can collect with
consent, sell it to a partner
company, and then instead of giving
a percentage back to the end user,
it's donated directly to the NGO.
All of that would be done in real time.
That then allows us to do
something quite clever, right?
If we apply that to the virtual tree and
seed example, we're able to create this
interaction where when someone plants
that virtual seed, they've literally just
paid for a tree to be planted in reality,
just simply by interacting with the
virtual experience and being part of that.
Whatever the NGO experience entails,
be it the virtual tree example and
the seed planting or something else
entirely for a different cause, we
communicate to the audience clearly
that just by doing something in the
virtual world, you're actually making
a difference in the real world.
You might even have a
real-time counter up on screen.
You know, tree just planted,
number of trees planted today.
There's various ways of doing this.
It could be blockchain backed, but the
point really being that much more people
are willing to give data than real money.
As much as they'd like to, not everyone
can financially afford to donate.
So giving data and letting us turn
that into revenue in the background
on our end makes it even more
inclusive and accessible to everyone.
No one has to leave the experience
with the guilt trip of not
having contributed to the cause.
Even people without their own devices can
still have the opportunity to donate their
motion capture data, for example, any data
captured by the venue during their visit.
They could donate their data via
dedicated self-service stations.
Also, that opens more doors
for more opportunities there.
"By doing this on-screen survey, you'll
have provided enough data to plant two
more trees." So that framework was really
about what methods can we utilize these
days so we don't have to resort to the
age-old outright begging for money.
It's also worth mentioning that I tried
to make these frameworks stackable.
So going back to the evolving
installation framework that saves
and rolls over to break that
seven minute loop, that particular
framework can stack with this one.
Those digital seeds might
grow into digital trees over
several seven minute cycles.
Fast-forward a week and the experience
is a whole virtual forest with all these,
virtual trees named after the planters.
And staying on this topic of basically
porting application UX into full-blown
immersive experiences, I was surprised
to see that another thing that hadn't
been done yet at Outernet was the idea
of an interactive mindfulness experience.
So we could literally take some of the
themes and ideas from popular mindfulness
apps like Calm and Headspace and create,
like, this seven minute mindfulness event.
If you think about where Outernet
is located in the center of
London, right by a busy station,
hectic, there's always crowds.
People are rushing around,
cortisol levels are elevated.
The way it's built, you can literally walk
straight off the street into the space.
So it gives a lot of footfall, a lot
of diversity, different cultures,
people traveling, commuters,
which is like a goldmine for data
collection, by the way, just to
touch back on that previous concept.
But it's busy London, it's stress.
So a seven-minute event which creates
this space with like a calming
mindfulness journey would also be
an equally great use of the space.
If you're familiar with these types of
apps, this one's pretty self-explanatory.
They all have these different activities
that users can follow along with.
Guided meditation, breathwork
sessions, vocal exercises,
Tai Chi movements, and so on.
And these are often coupled with
visuals, and usually there's some
kind of delicate gamification
elements to keep people engaged.
So these kinds of user experiences
can quite easily be adapted
for a larger digital stage.
And again, keeping accessibility and
inclusivity in mind, exercises wouldn't
be guided in any particular language.
Any instructions would just
be sensory audiovisual cues so
everyone can figure it out and
understand what's going on together.
Certain aspects of the audiovisual
experience might respond in real
time to collective efforts in unison.
So very simply, for example, you might
imagine a Sisyphus type animation, a
character or silhouette or a figure
pushing a boulder up a mountain.
Say the exercise is like a vocal exercise,
where everyone's sort of humming.
So if collectively the audience
are able to hit a certain decibel,
maybe that moves the animation on.
The character pushes the boulder
over the mountain and then onto
the next exercise kind of thing.
So that sort of gamification
element might encourage people to
engage with the exercises together.
So I briefly floated that
concept out there as well.
But maybe my favorite of all the concepts
and the one that excited me the most
was this piece I called 'The Learners'.
The reason I was most excited about
this one, in my mind, it had the
potential to have the biggest impact
and leave like a big impression.
It brings the big AI question right
now right to people's doorsteps, so to
speak, in quite a thought-provoking way.
So the idea was quite simply, if you can
imagine, you turn the space into like this
atmospheric, very minimal monotone sort
of void to human scale on the screens.
Got these like 12 or so mannequins
lined up, standing completely
still, static, not moving.
We have this I, Robot
type scenario, right?
So 12 or so mannequins, human
scale, faceless, genderless,
stylized, but humanoid.
Soundscape is ambient, maybe industrial.
One caption on screen that just says,
"They are watching. They learn from
you." With the idea that each mannequin
is tied to its own independent AI model.
So in real time, these virtual CG
mannequins are receiving the data
stream from the motion capture.
So we're passively just always
capturing movement from the general
public and then using just basic
silhouette mapping, they're starting
to learn in real time how to move.
And because each AI model is
independent, it learns in isolation.
Those different rates of learning makes
for something quite interesting to watch
and experience and interact with, right?
So you're gonna start to see some of
these mannequins moving awkwardly.
Some are more fluid with their movements.
They're copying audience gestures.
You can imagine a little girl
in the space does a cartwheel.
One's trying to copy it, or one
mirrors a perfect cartwheel.
We as an audience might even show
sympathy for the, the mannequins that are
clearly struggling and are not as fluid.
Will people try and help the slower
mannequins, by gesturing in front
of them, trying to feed them more
data, trying to help them to learn?
So it all becomes this, like,
really interesting social experiment
right in the heart of London.
And if we stack the first framework onto
this concept, their learning process might
save over several seven-minute cycles.
You might come back throughout the
day and they're super advanced.
They're copying people perfectly,
or they're anticipating movements,
or they're dancing perfectly.
You might not necessarily rely fully
on the data from motion capture,
and obviously have, like, a default
competency level for the CG models.
Pre-programmed basic level of competency
that progresses through in stages.
So over the course of the seven
minutes, you're allowing them to just
reach that basic level of competency.
We've already programmed
how they're gonna move.
The limbs are mapped to
the CG models already.
So you're kind of just
giving the impression of AI.
And you might stagger that across the
mannequins, so you have this, dynamic,
perceived different rates of learning.
Maybe the real time, skeletal
mapping might just be purposely
for specific interactions.
So like someone does this.
The way that cartwheel example
might work, instead of relying fully
on motion capture, interpreting
what that is, you might just
have a pre-programmed cartwheel.
AI then understands when it sees a
cartwheel, "Oh, that's cartwheel.
Trigger cartwheel." Perhaps once they've
reached that basic level of competency,
they're able to do pre-programmed
athletic things like somersaults
that make it much more dramatic.
And then, of course, there's
that philosophical question of
what happens when the cycle ends.
After that seven minutes, if we
were to cut that learning process
and the next cycle, the learning
process starts over again.
Have we just-- Have we effectively,
like, killed potentially
conscious machines at that point?
We've definitely reset their memory.
The whole experience kinda prompts
these sort of questions of, are
they learning from us, or are we
learning about ourselves from them?
And these other questions
around consciousness.
And I think this piece broaches
those big questions in quite a
tangible, fun, accessible, and easily
digestible way for all age groups